+++
title = "Fusion!"
+++
Main sequence stars produce most of their energy by hydrogen fusion (also
called hydrogen burning). The net reaction here is that four protons
(hydrogen nuclei) and a couple of electrons fuse into a single helium
nucleus - two protons and two neutrons - along with a heck of a lot of
outgoing radiation and neutrinos. But this same net reaction can happen
along two very different pathways: the proton-proton chain (PPC) and the
carbon-nitrogen-oxygen cycle (CNO cycle). The proton-proton chain reaction
works basically as you would expect:

1. Two protons fuse into a deuteron (deuterium nucleus - a proton and a
   neutron), a positron, and an electron neutrino
2. A deuteron and a proton fuse into a He-3 nucleus and an outgoing
   photon
3. Two He-3 nuclei fuse into a He-4 nucleus (just an alpha particle)
   and two protons

The net reaction here is just four protons -> one alpha particle,
and it has an efficiency of around 0.7%. Not too high, but when
you consider how much hydrogen there is in a star, you start to
understand how they can radiate so much. In order for the PPC to
work, the temperature of the star's core (where fusion is actually
taking place) needs to be above around 2*10^6 K.

The CNO cycle has the same net reaction as the PPC, but it is
catalyzed by carbon-12. It's a 6-step process in which carbon
fuses with a proton to create a nitrogen, which decays into a
heavier carbon. The heavier carbon then fuses with another proton
to produce stable nitrogen-14 and some radiation. The nitrogen
fuses with a third proton to produce an unstable isotope of
oxygen, which then decays into nitrogen-15. Finally, the heavy
nitrogen fuses with a fourth proton to produce a carbon-12 atom
and an alpha particle. The net reaction here is the same, so the
net efficiency (energy produced out of the total mass energy of
the constituent parts) is the same as for PPC. But CNO has a much
stronger dependence on the temperature of the star (T^19.9 as
compared with T^4 for PPC) and doesn't kick in until temperatures
around 10^7 K.

It turns out that the sun mainly burns hydrogen by PPC, as its
core temperature is not quite high enough for the CNO cycle.
